WHAT IS SURFSCAN?

Surfscan is a distributable workflow for visual verification of
subject-based image data. The workflow consists of two independent
components: a pre-processing pipeline and a standalone visualizer.

MRI Data -> Pre-Processing  -> 2D Images -> Visualizer -> Navigable Images

Surfscan pre-processing will soon be incorporated as standard
functionality within the LONI Pipeline. The Surfscan Visualizer
operates on the output from the pre-processing pipeline, and is
available for Linux, Mac OS X, and Windows. Note that the visualizer
is an independent component, and can display any 2D images previously
arranged in a Surfscan friendly directory structure.

WHY SURFSCAN?

We became interested in developing a data collection quality control
solution when various LONI researchers notified us of recurring image
validation challenges. Specifically, neuroscientists described being
overwhelmed carrying out validation of large-scale neuroimaging
output, such as verifying surface extraction executed on a repository
of MRI images.

WHAT CAN SURFSCAN DO FOR YOU?

Screenshot: http://ibowman.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/screenshot.png

Simply put, Surfscan provides visual representations of view-specific
pages of subject image data. An example of a view-specific subject
image page (as shown above) is 16 thumbnail images of a right
hemisphere form the sagittal view, one thumbnail per subject. The
interface of the Surfscan Visualizer allows users to page through
subjects, as well as scroll through different view images of the same
subject (e.g. switch from a lateral to an axial view). In addition,
users can mark subjects (generally to indicate collection errors). In
the example above, two subjects have been marked as their
corresponding cortical surface exhibits patches of discontinuity.

The following video demonstrates a user applying Surfscan toward
verifying the integrity of extracted cortical surfaces.

Video: http://player.vimeo.com/video/28206875?title=0&amp;byline=0&amp;portrait=0

Toward the beginning of the movie, the user marks a cortical surface
containing a defect. Then the users pages through the subjects, marks
two more images, and scrolls through different subject views. Note
that the asterisk marks persist through different views, as the pages
refer to the same group of subjects. (The currently implemented key
mapping has the UP and DOWN arrows paging through subjects, while the
RIGHT and LEFT arrows scroll through the views.) Finally, the user
emails the marked list.

WORKFLOW OVERVIEW

As mentioned above, the Surfscan workflow consists of two components. 

* Pre-Processing Pipeline -- Creates and writes cortical surface view
images to subject-specific directories.

* Surfscan Visualizers -- Displays the view images, and allows
navigation, visual inspection and categorization of subjects.

An example of the pre-processing output is 12 2D cortical image view
files arranged in subject-specific directories.

MRI Surface Data -> Pre-Processing -> 12 2D Images per each
subject-specific directory and an SSC file that lists the images

The pre-processor also creates an ASCII SSC (Surfscan) file that
points to the images and describes the directory structure. This SSC
file is used by the Surfscan Visualizer to display the data. The
format of this file is simple, and is described in the Standalone
Visualizer How-to document.

The Surfscan Visualizer uses the SSC file to load and display the
subject images to the user.

SSC file -> Surfscan Visualizer -> Navigable Image Display

SURFSCAN VISUALIZER STANDALONE CAPABILITY

If the user is able to format and arrange the 2D imaging data
appropriately, the Surfscan Visualizer can be used independently of
the pre-processor to view any subject-based two dimensional data. The
following video demonstrates the application of the Surfscan
Visualizer toward 2D slice data.

Video: http://player.vimeo.com/video/29154487?title=0&amp;byline=0&amp;portrait=0




